# OutSplice.plotJunctions v1

**Author(s):** Joseph Bendik, Sandhya Kalavacherla, Michael Considine, Bahman Afsari, Michael F. Ochs, Joseph Califano, Daria A. Gaykalova, Elana Fertig, Theresa Guo.  

**Contact:** Joseph Bendik (jbendik@health.ucsd.edu)

**Adapted as a GenePattern Module by:** Ted Liefeld (jliefeld@cloud.ucsd.edu)

**Task Type:** Classification

**LSID:**  urn:lsid:genepattern.org:module.analysis:00433


## Introduction
OutSplice.plotJunctions takes the output data from [OutSplice](https://genepattern.github.io/OutSplice/v1/) and creates bar 
 and waterfall plots of junction expression in both the tumor and
normal samples. The data for these plots comes from the raw junction input, the
gene expression values to reflect overall gene expression, and the junction
expression normalized by gene expression.

[OutSplice](https://genepattern.github.io/OutSplice/v1/) is a package that compares alternative splicing events between tumor 
and normal samples. This package is specifically designed for analyzing the gene
and junction information from RNA sequencing data provided by the user, or from 
the TCGA. This package generates a matrix of splicing outliers, which are 
junctions that are either significantly over or under-expressed compared to a 
control sample. OutSplice further designates observed outliers as skipping, 
insertion, or deletion events. Overall, OutSplice is novel in that it determines 
differential splicing burdens between tumors and normal samples and characterizes 
the nature of splicing outliers.


## Parameters

<span style="color: red;">*</span> indicates required parameter

- **data file**<span style="color: red;">*</span>
    - R Data file containing output from the SplicingOutliers or TCGA_SplicingOutliers Functions generated by OutSplice.
- **number**<span style="color: red;">*</span>
    - The number of junctions to plot. This can be top number of junctions (over or under expressed), or can be specific junctions in a list. Default is 1
- **junctions**
    - The specific junction you want to graph (or comma delimited list of junctions). Default is NULL [OPTIONAL]
- **tail**
    - 	Specify if you want top over or under expressed with tail='RIGHT' for junctions overexpressed in tumors, or tail='LEFT' for junctions underexpressed in tumors. 
- **out file prefix**<span style="color: red;">*</span>
    - user defined string for what the prefix of the output file should be named.
- **p value**
    - The significance threshold to use during Fisher analyses. Uses 0.05 by default.
- **gene**
    - Pick junctions based on a specific gene. TRUE means you will pick all the junctions mapping to a certain gene. FALSE means you do not pick based on the gene. Default is False.
- **symbol**
    - 	HGNC symbol of gene you want to graph. 
- **normal color**
    - Color for normals on graph. Default is blue 
- **tumor color**
    - Color for tumors on graph. Default is red

## Input Files

1.  Data file.  R Data file containing output from the SplicingOutliers or TCGA_SplicingOutliers Functions generated by OutSplice. [Example input file](https://github.com/genepattern/OutSplice.plotJunctions/blob/develop/GpUnit/data/HNSC_genes_normalized_2023-03-01.RDa)
    
## Output Files

  1.  pdf: <output prefix>.pdf   Bar and waterfall plots of junction expression in both the tumor and
normal samples. 

  
### Example Data

[Example input data is available on github](https://github.com/genepattern/OutSplice.plotJunctions/GpUnit/develop/test/data)

## References

Cancer Genome Atlas Network. Comprehensive genomic characterization of head and neck squamous cell carcinomas. Nature. 2015 Jan 29;517(7536):576-82. doi: 10.1038/nature14129. PMID: 25631445; PMCID: PMC4311405.

Guo T, Sakai A, Afsari B, Considine M, Danilova L, Favorov AV, Yegnasubramanian S, Kelley DZ, Flam E, Ha PK, Khan Z, Wheelan SJ, Gutkind JS, Fertig EJ, Gaykalova DA, Califano J. A Novel Functional Splice Variant of AKT3 Defined by Analysis of Alternative Splice Expression in HPV-Positive Oropharyngeal Cancers. Cancer Res. 2017 Oct 1;77(19):5248-5258. doi: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-16-3106. Epub 2017 Jul 21. PMID: 28733453; PMCID: PMC6042297.

Liu C, Guo T, Sakai A, Ren S, Fukusumi T, Ando M, Sadat S, Saito Y, Califano JA. A novel splice variant of LOXL2 promotes progression of human papillomavirus-negative head and neck squamous cell carcinoma. Cancer. 2020 Feb 15;126(4):737-748. doi: 10.1002/cncr.32610. Epub 2019 Nov 13. PMID: 31721164.

Liu C, Guo T, Xu G, Sakai A, Ren S, Fukusumi T, Ando M, Sadat S, Saito Y, Khan Z, Fisch KM, Califano J. Characterization of Alternative Splicing Events in HPV-Negative Head and Neck Squamous Cell Carcinoma Identifies an Oncogenic DOCK5 Variant. Clin Cancer Res. 2018 Oct 15;24(20):5123-5132. doi: 10.1158/1078-0432.CCR-18-0752. Epub 2018 Jun 26. PMID: 29945995; PMCID: PMC6440699.

M. F. Ochs, J. E. Farrar, M. Considine, Y. Wei, S. Meshinchi, and R. J.  Arceci. Outlier analysis and top scoring pair for integrated data analysis and  biomarker discovery. IEEE/ACM Trans Comput Biol Bioinform, 11: 520-32, 2014. PMCID: PMC4156935
    
## Version Comments

- **1.0.0** (2023-01-12): Initial draft of module.
